.\" Manpage for tag.
.\" Contact yoann.foreau@protonmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH man 1 "25 April 2018" "0.3.0" "tag man page"

.SH NAME
tag \- organize and search files by tags

.SH SYNOPSIS
tag [OPTIONS] [FILES...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
tag is a program which allows users to tag files. Tags are labels that have a name and eventually
a value associated to it. Tags are useful to organize files in a non-hierarchical way. They allow
the user to search, display and use files based on his own classification system.
.PP
It can be used to classify an ebook library for example. The user can set tags corresponding to the genre
of the book, to its author or its relesae date. Personnalized tags can be added, such as a 'best' tag to
easily retrieve favourite books, or a read date to know when a book was read for the last time, etc...
Although this kind of metadata can already be specified with some file formats, it is closed (meaning that
the user can't create new labels as he wants to), and non-standardized (different formats will have different
fields of information available). With tag, a user can associate any new information to any file.
So the same can also be done for any type of data, like pictures or music. Even program binaries and
sytem files can be tagged, if additional information is required by the administrator of the system. For
example, the administrator could want to keep track of why some programs were installed, and could easely
tag the binaries to remember it.
.PP
tag is based on the attr package. It uses the extended attributes feature embedded in linux file systems.
When a file is tagged using tag, it isn't modified, only its metadata is changed. The attribute-based
tagging system has the advantage of not modifying the files, and not having to manage an external data
base. That's why tag can be used as is, without any index or configuration file.

.SH OPTIONS

.SS "Core Options"
.TP
.B \-s NAME, --set=NAME
Create a tag labeled NAME on the specified FILES.
.TP
.B \-v VAL, --value=VAL
Set the value of a new tag, or modify it if the tag already exists. Must be used with -s option.
.TP
.B \-d NAME, --delete=NAME
Delete the specified tag if it exits.
.TP
.B \-g, --get
Print every tag and their values for the specified FILES.
.TP
.B \-l, --list
Print a list of every tag on a given PATH.
.TP
.B \-S, --save
List every tag and their values for the specified FILES and save them in a tag_dump file (.td).
.TP
.B \-R BACKUP, --restore=BACKUP
Restore every tag listed in a tag_dump file. If the paths contained in the backup file are relative,
then the tag command must be called in the directory where these files are located. Otherwise, the
paths have to be modified to correspond to the actual files. This function doesn't need to be called with
a search option, or with the '--recusive' and '--all' options, since it simply follows the tag_dump file.

.SS "Search Options"
.TP
.B \-q EXPR, --query=EXPR
Search tags and print the results or feed them to --set, --delete, --get or --list options if specified.

EXPR is a formated expression which can be a single tag name or a logical operation between multiple tags and values. In a given expression each member is either a tag name, a comparison between tag values or a nested expression between parenthesis. Each member of a given expression is a test, which can return true or false. For example, if a member is a simple tag name, then it will return true for a given file if the tag is set on this specific file. An expression can be articulated by logical operators and bounded with parenthesis. See QUERY section for more details.
.TP
.B \-t, --tagged
List every tagged file, and print the results or feed them to --set, --delete, --get or --list. This option is useless with --delete and --get, because they already target tagged files only.
.TP
.B \-u, --untagged
List every untagged file, and print the results or feed them to --set, --delete, --get or --list. This option is useless with --delete and --get because they don't target untagged files.

.SS "Other Options"
.TP
.B \-r, --recursive
Execute tag functions recursively.
.TP
.B \-a, --all
Include directories.
.TP
.B \-h, --help
Print a help text.

.SH QUERY

.SS "Usage"
.PP
Tag queries can do three types of operations. They can check for the presence or absence of a tag on a particular
file, they can do logical operations, which simply consists of
.B AND,
.B OR,
.B XOR
and
.B NOT
statements to aticulate the query, and relative operations to compare tag values. A relative operation can take three forms.
It can be a comparison between two tags (ex: 'tagA>tagB'), which is done by invoking tags by their name. In this case, if one
or both of the tags don't have values, or if their format does not match, the relative operation will return false. It can be
a comparison between a tag and a quoted value (ex: 'tag=="whateverstring"'), that can either be a number, a string or a date
(see FORMATS for more informations). It can also be a comparison between a tag and an unquoted value (ex: 'tag<=10'). Strings
must be quoted to avoid being taken as a tag name.
.PP
Parenthesis can be added to isolate and nest some expressions within the query. Individual tag names or relative operations
can be put between parenthesis but don't need to be. However, superfluous parenthesis, around the entire query or doubled
around a single expression for example, will result in an error.
.PP
Simple queries consisting of one tag name can be left unquoted, but more complex ones should be quoted with a '' pair to avoid
the shell from interpreting logical and relative operators.

.SS "Logical Operators"
.PP
.B '&' - AND:
will return true if both sides of the expression are true
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag&othertag'
.fi
.PP
.B '|' - OR:
will return true if at least one side of the expression is true
.nf
example: tag -q '(tag>5)|othertag'
.fi
.PP
.B '^' - XOR:
will return true if exactly one side of the expression
.nf
is true, but false if both sides are true or false
example: tag -q 'tag^(othertag&thirdtag)'
.fi
.PP
.B '!' - NOT:
will return true if an expression is false
.nf
example: tag -q '!tag&othertag'
example: tag -q 'tag^!(othertag=="yousayyes")'
note: a NOT operation will return every file for which
the condition tested is false, even untagged files
.fi

.SS "Relational Operators"
.PP
.B '==' - equal:
will return true if both sides have the same value
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag==5'
example: tag -q 'tag=="string"'
example: tag -q 'tag==othertag'
.fi
.PP
.B '!=' - not equal:
will return true if both sides don't have the same value
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag!="hello, I am a string"'
.fi
.PP
.B '>' - greater than:
will return true if left value is bigger than right value
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag>7'
example: tag -q 'othertag>"I am an other string"'
note: string values are ranked by alphabetical order
(with the ASCII table, using strcmp)
.fi
.PP
.B '<' - lesser than:
will return true if left value is lesser than right value
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag<othertag'
.fi
.PP
.B '>=' - greater or equal:
will return true if left value is greater or equal to right value
.nf
example: tag -q 'tag>=42'
.fi
.PP
.B '<=' - lesser ot equal:
will return true if left value is lesser or equal to right value
.nf
example: tag -q '97<=tag'
.fi

.SH TAG FORMATS

.SS "Strings"
.PP
This is the default format. If the value entered by the user doesn't correspond to any
other tag format, it will be written as an ASCII string. Its length is limited by the
maximum size of an extended attribute value, which is 64k, or 65,536 bytes. Accounting for the
format byte (the first byte of any tag value stores its format), and the null byte, a tag string
can be up to 65,534 characters long.
.nf
example: tag -s author -v "Stephen King" Misery.epub
.fi

.SS "Links"
.PP
A tag can point to a file on the disk. Its path is stored in an ASCII string, so it has the same
limits as the string format. When a string value is enterd by the user, tag will check if it corresponds
to an actual file on the disk. If it is the case it will be considered a link. Otherwise, tag will
interpret the value as a regular string. Tag accepts relative and absolute paths alike, but will store
the link as an absolute path. Link values can only be compared with the "==" and "!=" operators. Any
other relative operation on this type of value will always return false.
.nf
example: tag -s pal_file -v ./foo bar
.fi

.SS "Numbers"
.PP
Tag numbers can only be integers. The number will be written as a 64 bits signed integer, which means
that values must be limited to the [−9,223,372,036,854,775,808, +9,223,372,036,854,775,807] range. If
a value entered is out of this range tag will return an error and won't write anything to avoid integer
overflow. The string entered by the user must represent the chosen value in a decimal format and can be
signed (preceeded by a '-' or '+' sign).
.nf
example: tag -s watch_count -v 9001 DBZ_ep21.mkv
.fi

.SS "Dates"
.PP
To be interpreted as a date the string entered must have the following format: YYYY-MM-DD, where the Year
is at least one digit long and can be signed, and the Month and Day must be two digits long. The Year value
will be stored as a 64 bits signed integer, so it has the same range as the Number format. Month and Day can
be equal to 00 (if only the year must be stored for example), and must otherwise repesent a possible date in
the gregorian calender.
.nf
example: tag -s date -v 2015-10-21 hoverboard.txt
.fi

.SH SEE ALSO
tagex(1)
.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
.SH AUTHOR
Yoann Foreau (yoann.foreau@protonmail.com)
